29-Dec-2022

Dear Mr. Cebulski

Manuscript ID HOL-22-0139 entitled "The Glaciolacustrine Sediment Record of Cariboo Lake: Implications for Holocene Fluvial and Glacial Watershed Dynamics in Eastern British Columbia, Canada" which you submitted to The Holocene, has been reviewed.  The Review Comments are included at the bottom of this letter.

Some revisions are suggested for your manuscript.  Therefore, I invite you to respond to the Review Comments and to revise your manuscript.

To revise your manuscript, log into https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/holocene and enter your Author Center, where you will find your manuscript title listed under "Manuscripts with Decisions."  Under "Actions," click on "Create a Revision."  Your manuscript number has been appended to denote a revision.

You will be unable to make your revisions on the originally submitted version of the manuscript.  Instead, revise your manuscript using a word processing program and save it on your computer.  Please also highlight the changes to your manuscript within the document by using the track changes mode in MS Word or by using bold or colored text.

Once the revised manuscript is prepared, you can upload it and submit it through your Author Center.

When submitting your revised manuscript, you will be able to respond to the Review Comments in the space provided.  You can use this space to document any changes you make to the original manuscript.  In order to expedite the processing of the revised manuscript, please be as specific as possible in your response to each Review Comment.

IMPORTANT:  Your original files are available to you when you upload your revised manuscript.  Please delete any redundant files before completing the submission.

Because we are trying to facilitate timely publication of manuscripts submitted to The Holocene, your revised manuscript should be uploaded as soon as possible.  If it is not possible for you to submit your revision in a reasonable amount of time, we may have to consider your paper as a new submission.

Once again, thank you for submitting your manuscript to The Holocene and I look forward to receiving your revision.

Sincerely,
Dr. Atle Nesje
Associate Editor, The Holocene
atle.nesje@uib.no


Reviewer(s)' Comments to Author:

Reviewer: 1

Comments to the Author
A note here that the submitted pdf contains an ill-formatted version of Table 1 that appears out of place on page 2. Also, two sequential versions of the complete manuscript are here for a total of 67 pages. For my review I cite the page numbers of the first version of the manuscript, starting on the title page numbered as page 3 of 65.

General: This is a well-developed study of the sedimentation patterns within a large, elongated lake basin located in a glaciated watershed of the Carboo mountains of southeastern British Columbia. The objectives are framed to establish basin-wide mechanisms and develop a high-resolution record of sediment accumulation for a paleoclimatic interpretation of the past 2000 years. Methods include acoustic profiles, surface sediment collections and longer cores, which combine to provide a multiple proxy set of results that address the objectives. Results are evaluated carefully within the context of the local and distal watershed processes. The acoustic results are used to develop an interpretive framework for the deglacial sedimentary history of the basin, which is judiciously tied into the detailed varve analyses of the past 2000 years to the best of the ability of the chronological information from radiocarbon and varve counts. Thus, some of the conclusions are inherently limited by the method, for example the timing of deglaciation, but the regional comparisons provide a framework for making reasonable, but not yet fully proven, conclusions. The varve record is well-developed, with careful consideration of limitations and evaluation within a regional varve framework. However, the final comparisons of the varve record with northern hemisphere trends are not persuasive and will require revisions to better develop the case for a hydroclimatic interpretation with regional comparisons with multi-proxy lake sediment records in the study region. There is also a need for decisions to be made about the prominent low-frequency differences in varve thickness trends between the two cores for the hydroclimatic comparisons. The paper is well-suited for The Holocene and with the revisions to address its few weaknesses it will be of interest to researchers from a broad range of disciplines.


Title: the title has a focus on implications for Holocene watershed dynamics whereas the glacial and watershed dynamics explored in the paper would be more accurately described as having implications for the hydroclimatic interpretation of the varve record. Consider a revision to report the paper topics more accurately.

Abstract: p.4 line 2 says acoustic transects reflect the Holocene but line 11-12 says acoustic records represent the deglacial and Holocene – be consistent and the sentences are repetitive. Overall, the abstract could be improved by beginning with ‘what’, which would be an explanation to readers that there is 1) an acoustic record of sedimentation since deglaciation and 2) a varve record 2k in length.

Introduction:
p.5 line 4. These two sentences would read more smoothly with a transition, which is a common writing problem throughout the manuscript for both sentences and paragraphs. For example, after pointing out that sub-annual records are used ‘across the globe’, the next sentence could begin with a specific transition such as “In the case of sedimentary sequences from… glaciated watersheds, they have been important in…” The writing would be improved overall with a thorough revision of transitions.

p.5 line 23-24. I think what is meant to be conveyed here is that there is a reduced sensitivity to climate variability with low sedimentation rates, which is a primary influence on signal to noise. This point is brought up later in the manuscript but would be better spelled out here, in the introduction. A new paragraph would do well on lie 23 beginning with ‘Previous studies…’ that could spend more time on articulating the balance between sed rates and upstream filters for high signal to noise ratio records. Would also do well to end with a specific explanation about how Cariboo fits into this spectrum – what exactly is the ‘gap’ and specifically how does Cariboo fill it?

p.5 line 41. More specific explanation about how acoustic profiles can be used would be helpful here, especially in this sentence that implies use for temperature and precipitation reconstructions. I suspect what is meant here is that the varve counts are useful for T and P. Consider more explicit writing to explain that the cores are used to assess hydroclimate whereas the acoustic profiles are used to assess the basin-wide sedimentation history.

p.6 line 10. The last objective is lacking background discussion within the introduction that should include further discussion of the climate setting and influences. Also more background on previous hydroclimatic reconstructions is needed here in the introduction and in the closing section of the discussion. See Steinman et al., QSR 2019 for a regional summary, including the impacts of the Mazama ash. It may also be worth noting if the Mazama ash is known to occur in lakes around the Cariboo region and if some of the reflectors could be related (or not). For further background also see Rodysill et al., QSR 2018, Nelson et al., PNAS 2011 and Steinman et al., GRL 2014 on hydroclimatic variability, patterns, and drivers of the late Holocene in northwest North America – these data most accurately reflect the proximal conditions of Cariboo Lake which would make a much more compelling argument for a hydroclimatic interpretation of the varve record than northern hemisphere reconstructions which are less detailed and accurate at the regional scale.

Study Area:
p.6 line 18-19. Williams Lake is not identified on Figure 1 and the number and names of the lakes that are upstream of Cariboo would be well mentioned here. A distance legend is needed on Figure 1.
p. 6 line 31. ‘ban’ should be ‘fan’
p. 6 line 32. Clarify that these are measurements of basin areas, i.e. ‘8 km2 in surface area’
p. 6 line 37. Not sure if follow this statement about ‘evidence for post glacial scouring’ – is this meant to imply ice scouring and a question about glacial limits?
p. 6 line 38-44. Is there any knowledge about the sediment infill of Lanezi and Sandy Lakes? If so, this would be a good place to describe.

Methods:
p.7 line 46. ‘730 cm3’ from Ekman dredge – it would be useful to describe the length of the short sediment cores. To what sediment depth do the short cores extend?

p.8 line 45. What specifically is meant here by ‘best preserved’? In what sense needs to be explained.

p.9 line 7. What specifically is meant here by ‘stratigraphic breaks’? Does this mean gaps within cores, between cores, both or additional types of breaks?
p.9 line 8. By ‘working cores’ do you mean ‘working halves’?

Results:
p. 9 line 41-42. A little more explanation of ‘cross hatching’ is needed here to direct the reader’s attention to the figure and explaining that this refers to the diagonal lines across all panels. This is not immediately obvious.

p. 10 line 22. Not sure what is meant here by the ‘record is cut off’. In what manner and why?

p.12 line 10. Suggest new paragraph beginning here with ‘The two buried troughs…’
p.12 line 14-15. It would be very helpful if the ‘wedge of sediment’ were indicated on Figure 3C to help readers recognize that it is not clearly part of facies A.
p.12 line 36. It is not clear in what way specifically that the Frank Creek delta is ‘different’ – clarify.

p. 13 line 23-27. Define D50, D90, and D10 in descriptive sedimentary terms for a broader audience (ie., sand, silt, clay). 
p.13 line 41. Using percent clay, silt and sand is the most accessible way of describing this data to a broad audience and I suggest that it be used throughout and on the figures.

p. 14 line 27. Revise ‘well-preserved’ to ‘distinct laminations’ throughout - it is introduced later but is a more specifically descriptive term. In Fig 5 both E13 and E18 look ‘well-preserved’ the difference has to do with the clarity of the laminations.
p. 14 line 43-44. This interpretation has been made earlier and this explanation should be moved upward in the manuscript for the first time it is used.

p. 15 line 45. Is the lower %OM here in related to dilution by higher clastic flux? Clarify.

p. 16 line 3. To be most accurate, consider changing ‘suggest that’ here to ‘supports the hypothesis that’ 

p. 16 line 30. ‘prevented finding ash’ here is based on looking for what? A visual color change, and/or in grain size and/or microscopic examination for volcanic glass?
p. 16 line 31-32. To be most clear, consider changing the start of the sentence that begins with ‘Records…’ to  ‘The chronology of the Cariboo lake core records of grain size…’
p. 16 line 40. Report AMS radiocarbon ages in 14C years with measured error range and the version of Calib used to calibrate the ages. A table of chronological data is advised.

p. 17 line 20-21. Or the large piece of wood possibly settled into the sediments due to its weight.
p. 17 line 23. A transition to this new paragraph is needed. Suggest “By comparison with nearby lakes…’
p. 17 line 28-30. This reasoning is not clear – are these estimates based on a smaller Cariboo watershed size because of more glacial ice? How was this done?
p. 17 line 36-37. Core disturbances should be described in the methods section explaining the type of disturbance and the core depths where it occurs.
p. 17 line 40. At this point some discussion of varve counting uncertainty estimates would be helpful – it shows up on p. 18 but should be earlier – suggest reorganizing this section and that this information be compiled in a table of chronological data.
p. 17 line 41. Here is ‘discernable couplets’ etc., which should also appear earlier in the paper.

p. 19 line 40-42. This point would be better placed in the discussion in a section focused on the rationale for the hydroclimatic interpretation.

p. 21 line 4. The use of ‘indiscernible couplets’ would be better used here.
p. 21 line 24. Being more specific here would be more information such as ‘Alignment closer than the observed ~500 year offset was not expected’.
p. 21 line 27-37. Again, a table of ages with varve dates and sed rates with errors is advisable to make this information easier to digest.

p. 23 line 44. Also soil development and stability

Discussion:
p. 25 line 46. Reference needed for lack of moraine evidence for stagnant ice fronts.

p. 26 line 6-7. Transition to paragraph is needed and consider changing to ‘extensive watershed coverage by glaciers’
p. 26 line 13. Is the ‘high accumulation rates are also likely for Cariboo lakes during this time’ based on the massive character indicated by the acoustic data?
p. 26 line 15. Suggest adding ‘Northern’ to ‘Rockies’ because warming is earlier in central Rockies. Also, this paragraph could be integrated with above paragraph more concisely.
p. 26 line 17. Is ‘where glaciers persist’ referring to Cariboo Lake? If yes, this would be good to say directly.
All of page 26 could be revised to develop the arguments more clearly and concisely.

p. 27 line 17. Rather than ‘So’, consider ‘Therefore’
p. 27 line 22-23. Rather than ‘would be important’, consider ‘would be expected to be important’. This paragraph is too long, loses focus, and the point is not clear. Requires revision to improve argument and make a clear point.

p. 28 line 21. ‘Ideal’ in what way?
p. 28 line 26. By ‘Actual’ do you mean the existing core data show this? Requires clarification.
p. 28 line 31. By saying the Cariboo Lake record is ‘very high resolution’, do you also mean by comparison with the records just described? Suggest revision.
p. 28 line 40. Unclear why the comparisons with regional data is lacking. An extensive amount of information is available.

Figure 12 needs an x-axis label ‘Age CE’

p. 29 lines 2-4. The way this sentence begins with ‘While’ is unclear and it does not make sense.
p. 29. lines 10-16. Although the varve thicknesses decline in both V1 and V2 over the Medieval Climate Anomaly (which I suggest MWP be changed to), they increase again during the LIA only in V2. While the differences in the two cores was discussed earlier it needs to be brought back again into this comparison to clarify why the trend is V2 is the ‘correct’ one for comparison as this explanation implies.
p. 29 lines 17-27. This section is too brief, casual, and speculative – see comments above about need for more comprehensive regional comparison. Remove ‘tempting’ and consider the influence of land cover and land use change more thoroughly.

Conclusions:
Point 1. Age of massive to laminated transition from acoustic data is an estimate and this should be made very clear here.
Point 3. Overflow currents are only lightly discussed and if they are going to feature as a major conclusion there should be more attention to them. A regional comparison is needed to argue for hydroclimatic sensitivity more persuasively.


Reviewer: 2

Comments to the Author
The authors present an ~2k year long lake sediment-based record of glacier variability in the northern Rockies along with seismic and sediment core transect data from Cariboo lake, British Columbia. There is a substantial amount of high quality data in the paper and thorough characterization of the sedimentology of the Cariboo Lake basin. The paper is generally very well written and organized, with high quality figures. I do however have some concerns that will likely require moderate (arguably major) revision to the paper. My main problem lies with how the age model data are presented and discussed and with how the age model was assembled. I also have concerns with how the varve thickness data are interpreted in the context of climate change as it influences glacier variability. My main comments/questions/ recommended edits appear below, but there are smaller edits not listed below that appear in the attached pdf. I feel that my concerns can all be addressed with a round or two of revisions, and I would be happy to review a revised version of the paper.

Byron A. Steinman – University of Minnesota Duluth

Comments

Introduction 1st paragraph: This paragraph is very long and should be broken up into smaller more focused paragraphs.

Page 3 – Line 39: This is repeated in the next section so delete here. Same for the lake surface area 10 km2.

Study Area: There should be basic information about the climate of the region here. A table showing monthly precipitation/temperature would be helpful, or at least a description of the seasonality of precip/temp. Reanalysis products or station data - if available - could be used for this.

Page 7 – Lines 7-9: What is the uncertainty estimate on the layer counting if any?

Page 7 – Lines 23-26: What calibration software and calibration curve was applied?

Figure 3 caption: See attached pdf.

Page 10 – Lines 42-43: I don't think distances are long enough for this to be relevant given you are talking about sediment entering along the short axis of the lake. Distance of many km are required for Coriolis to be meaningful beyond the scale of a meter or two. It seems more likely that nearshore currents would be responsible for this.

Page 14 – Chronology: More information needs to be presented on the chronology data. The 14C age and analytical uncertainty should be provided, along with the calibrated median age and 2 sigma range. There's also no mention of the calibration curve used to produce these ages which makes me question whether they are in fact calibrated ages. This information should be summarized in a table.

It's difficult to assess the quality of the presented age estimates without this information.

Page 14 – Line 40: What are these ranges? Is this the max and min 2sigma range? Please clarify. Also is this calendar years BP or calibrated years? I assume the former.

Page 14 - Line 20: Was the sample collected from the outermost edge of the core, i.e. was it touching the core barrel? If so then it should not be used, and you could make a case that it should not have been analyzed in the first place and thus doesn't need to be presented. If it was not touching the edge of the corer, then it's not possible that the corer pushed it to a lower depth, in which case the older age is much harder to explain.

Page 15 – end of 2nd paragraph: This is the point I expected to see the age models presented as figures. I recommend showing depth on the y-axis and age on the x-axis. Show the varved based chronologies and the 14C ages. This would make it much easier to assess the chronologies for the cores.

Page 15 – line 40: I'm not sure what you mean by this. Please clarify.

Page 16 – lines 31-35: It's difficult to assess the quality of the chronology with the data that is presented and because of how the data are presented. Please see comments above about 14C data requirements and including age model figures (depth vs age). 

Also you mention undercounting here. How much uncertainty does this contribute? This should be mentioned in the methods and discussed in the results.

Also I was expecting by now for the varve formation mechanism to have been discussed, but maybe that comes later. How did/do the varves form? What is the exact process that leads to their formation?

Page 17 – Lines 36-42: I agree with this approach, but the chronology data need to be more thoroughly presented/discussed.

Page 19 – Line 13: cal right?

Page 19 – Lines 25-26: What are the errors in the counting method? How much do they potentially affect the accuracy? I think these are probably varves, but I'm not convinced at this point.

Page 19 – Lines 30-32:  The problem with extrapolating is that you are using only presumably the median age. What does the sed rate / age model look like if you use the 2 sigma high and low calibrated 14C ages? The actual sed rate is very likely somewhere within this range. Keep in mind also the farther you get from the 14C age the greater the uncertainty (number of years separating the high and low sed rate age models). 

Also This is really good agreement. I need more info on the 14C age, but the varve age appears to be within, or nearly, the uncertainty range of the 14C ages. If that's the case I would stress that point.

Page 19 – Lines 38-40: Probably this is true. But without better demonstration of valid chronology we can't be sure. Include age model figures that show depth vs age with locations of turbidites (or instantaneous deposits) marked along with sections where ages were estimated based on varve based sed rates above and below. The figure(s) should also show the 14C ages and the age models based on the 14C ages including the extrapolated ages. The extrapolated 14C ages should include uncertainty based on use of the 2sigma high and low ages (i.e. 3 age models - one based on the median 14C age, and 1 for each 2sig hi and lo). Another option is to use age model software like bacon or bchron and show the output of this along with the varve chronologies. I think this would strengthen the paper tremendously and make this statement conclusive.

Page 19 – Line 46: the median age?

Figure 11 caption: See pdf for highlighted text. median age? 2sigma error?

Discussion – last paragraph: Why exactly do you think it was drier during MCA? Are the glaciers in the catchment controlled by precipitation amounts more so than temperature? Isn't it possible the warmer temperatures raised the ELA, reduced glacier size and snowpack amounts and thus reduced sed delivery into the lake?

What evidence is there that it was wetter during LIA? It's possible the cooler temps allowed glaciers/snow pack to expand and produce greater sed delivery. 

There is nuance regarding glacier responses to temp/precip that needs to be explored before you can say that this record of glacier activity reflects specific combinations of climate variable changes though time.

Conclusion point #3: Maybe I missed it but I didn't catch a description of this mechanism in the discussion. Make sure it's in there.

Conclusion - last paragraph: A stronger concluding statement is warranted. Finish with the main point that you want to make here - that the Cariboo Lake record provides insight on glacier activity changes over the last 2000 years at a very high resolution relative to other available records and thus warrants further study to produce xyz result. Or something like that.

** The application was unable to attach manuscript files to this email, because one or more of the files exceeded the allowable attachment size (6MB). **

